---
layout: post
title: Book Review - Strategic Selling
date: 2015-09-19
---

[The New Strategic Selling
](http://www.amazon.com/The-New-Strategic-Selling-Successful/dp/044669519X)
provides a firm framework for classifying and following through sales in a
structured way that can be repeated and standardized in an organisation.

Having taken an interest in selling, selling tactics, and psychology, I found
the book quite informative as it detailed a process focused approach to selling
in a structured way that I could see applied easily on top of what most
businesses are already doing.

<!--more-->

The New Strategic Selling is a process for the "complex sale". That is a sale
that involves multiple stakeholders and parties and must satisfy a range of
requirements and terms. This in contrast to the "simple sale" which is a sale
that typically takes place between two people where the buying decision is made
by a single person.

The book provides some great insights, the most valuable of which I found to be
their definitions of different **Buying Influence's** in the sale. These are
the **Economic Buyer**, **User Buyer**, **Technical Buyer** and **Coaches**.
The book then details what to expect and how to deal with each of these
influences throughout the sale.  It is important to identify these persons
early on in the sale as they all play a key role in securing the sale.

The other valuable piece of information I gained from the book was the
definition of the **Sales Funnel**. A process for categorizing opportunities
and steps on how to move an opportunity further through the sales process.

Other pieces of wisdom gained were around **Response Modes**; a category of
types to classify what mode an influencer in the sale is in and some advice on
how to structure and approach an influencer in one of these modes.

Overall, I found The New Strategic Selling to be a great "macro" selling book.
Unlike [The Challenger 
Sale]({% post_url 2015-09-20-book-review-the-challenger-sale %}) or [SPIN 
Selling]({% post_url 2015-08-30-book-review-spin-selling %}), it does not focus
on the details of interactions and conversations of the sale but instead takes
a step back and looks at the entire process. The provide a structured format to
qualify and proceed if the conditions are appropriate. The methodology they
provide is one that is generic enough to fit all organizations and would
compliment well with the aforementioned resources.

[{% image articles/StrategicSelling.png alt="Strategic Selling Mind Map" title="Strategic Selling Mind Map" class="article-image webfeedsFeaturedVisual" %}](
{% asset_path 'articles/StrategicSelling.png' %})
